docs/general: Add Sapphire Quickstart (#218)
oasisprotocol/docs: docs/dapp/sapphire/quickstart.md

# Quickstart

> In this tutorial, you'll port an Eth project in under 10 minutes (or your money

Reviewer: Remove "(or your money back)", because some people can be very literal.

back),
and then go on to deploy a unique dapp that requires confidentiality to work.
By the end of the tutorial, you should feel comfortable setting up your Eth
development environment to target Sapphire, and know how and when to use
confidentiality.

The expected completion time of this tutorial is 30 minutes.

## Port an Eth project

### Setup

Start by installing [Truffle](https://github.com/trufflesuite/truffle#install).

Then, run these commands in your terminal:

```sh
mkdir MetaCoin && cd MetaCoin
truffle unbox MetaCoin
git init
git add :/ && git commit -m "Initial commit"

> pnpm init && pnpm add -D @truffle/hdwallet-provider # npm or yarn also works

Reviewer 2: I would avoid anything else than `npm`. I used this in Emerald tutorial:
```sh
npm i @truffle/hdwallet-provider --save-dev
```

Author: `npm` sucks

```

### Deploy to Emerald (non-confidential EVM)

#### Get some eROSE

:::tip

To avoid confusion through the rest of this section we will denote ROSE the

> native token on the consensus layer only. When ROSE is deposited into Emerlad or

Reviewer: "Emerlad"

> #### Get some eROSE
> 
> :::tip
> 
> To avoid confusion through the rest of this section we will denote ROSE the
> native token on the consensus layer only. When ROSE is deposited into Emerlad or
> Sapphire ParaTime we will call them eROSE or sROSE respectively.
> 
> :::
> 
> In order to deploy to the Emerald Testnet, we'll need some eROSE tokens.

Reviewer 2: Now that I went through a complete tutorial, I would not use explicit eROSE and sROSE currencies, since there is only a simple faucet deposit involved.

```suggestion
#### Get some tokens on Emerald Testnet

In order to deploy to the Emerald Testnet, we'll need some tokens on our account first.
```

Reviewer: Need to alter the paragraph above too, if this change is taken.

Author: This change will not be taken. This is the name people enter in metamask in the tutorial video. Also, we need a way to distinguish between the tokens, and we need to drill that in everywhere we can.

Get those by heading to [Oasis Testnet faucet] and selecting "Emerald" as
the first dropdown.
Set the second box to the address of a burner wallet.

> It'll take a few moments to receive your eROSE after submitting the form.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It'll take a few moments to receive your ROSE after submitting the form.
```

[Oasis Testnet faucet]: https://faucet.testnet.oasis.dev/

#### Add the Emerald Testnet to Truffle

Apply this patch to `truffle-config.js`:

```diff
diff --git a/truffle-config.js b/truffle-config.js
index 68d534c..15c671d 100644
--- a/truffle-config.js
+++ b/truffle-config.js
@@ -22,7 +22,7 @@
 // const mnemonic = process.env["MNEMONIC"];
 // const infuraProjectId = process.env["INFURA_PROJECT_ID"];

-// const HDWalletProvider = require('@truffle/hdwallet-provider');
+const HDWalletProvider = require('@truffle/hdwallet-provider');

 module.exports = {
   /**
@@ -53,6 +53,14 @@ module.exports = {
     //   network_id: 5,       // Goerli's id
     //   chain_id: 5
     // }

> +    emerald: {

Reviewer 2: Emerald is also on the Mainnet, so:
```suggestion
+    emerald_testnet: {
```

Author: This is for sake of simplicity. `--network emerald_testnet` is just much harder to type and think about. It's clear from context that it's testnet. This is a testnet project, after all.

Also, if you start messing with the code, it'll drift from the recorded video, and I ain't gonna re-record that.

Reviewer 3: I think this is resolved with the comment:
```
// This is Testnet! If you want Mainnet, add a new network config item.
```

I would just move it above the config item.

Reviewer 3: > I would just move it above the config item.

Done

+      provider: () =>
+        new HDWalletProvider([process.env.PRIVATE_KEY], "https://testnet.emerald.oasis.dev"),
+      network_id: 0xa515,
+    },
   },

   // Set default mocha options here, use special reporters etc.
```

#### Do the Truffle Thing

You'll want a script to run some methods on the contract.

> Pop open your favorite editor and jam out the following stanza:

Reviewer: Reword "jam"/"stanza" for ESL readers.

  const tx = await mc.sendCoin(mc.address, 42);
  console.log(`\nSent some coins in ${tx.tx}.`);
  const t = tx.logs[0].args;
  console.log(`A Transfer(${t[0]}, ${t[0]}, ${t[2].toNumber()}) was emitted.`);

  const storageSlot = await new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
    const getStoragePayload = {
      method: "eth_getStorageAt",
      params: [
        mc.address,
        keccak256(
          "0x" + "00".repeat(12) + mc.address.slice(2) + "00".repeat(32)
        ),
        "latest",
      ],
      jsonrpc: "2.0",
      id: "test",
    };
    mc.contract.currentProvider.send(getStoragePayload, (err, res) => {
      if (err) reject(err);
      else resolve(res.result);
    });
  });
  console.log(`The balance storage slot contains ${storageSlot}.`);

  const balance = await mc.getBalance(mc.address);
  console.log(`The contract now has balance: ${balance.toNumber()}.`);
}

module.exports = async function (callback) {
  try {
    await exerciseContract();
  } catch (e) {
    console.error(e);
  }
  callback();
};
```

Save it to `scripts/exercise-contract.js`.
We'll use it in just a bit.

Next, you can run the following and see the contract being deployed.

```sh

> PRIVATE_KEY="0x..." truffle migrate --network emerald

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PRIVATE_KEY="0x..." truffle migrate --network emerald_testnet
```

```

> Everything should be smooth sailing so far.

Reviewer: Reword "smooth sailing" for ESL readers?

Finally, run this line and observe some output.

```

> > PRIVATE_KEY="0x..." truffle exec --network emerald scripts/exercise.contract.js`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> PRIVATE_KEY="0x..." truffle exec --network emerald_testnet scripts/exercise.contract.js`
```

Sent some coins in 0xf415ab586ef1c6c61b84b3bd803ae322f375d1d3164aa8ac13c9ae83c698a002
A Transfer(0x56e5F834F88F9f7631E9d6a43254e173478cE06a, 0x56e5F834F88F9f7631E9d6a43254e173478cE06a, 42) was emitted.
The balance storage slot contains 0x2a.
The contract now has balance: 42
```

Great!
That'll be the baseline for our confidential deployment.

> Stay tuned...

Reviewer: Strike "Stay tuned..."

### Deploy to Sapphire (confidential EVM)

> #### Get some sROSE

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Get some tokens on Sapphire Testnet
```

Now for the fun part.
As for Emerald, we need to configure the Sapphire network and get some tokens.
Hit up the one and only [Oasis Testnet faucet] and this time select "Sapphire".
Submit the form and your way.

#### Add the Sapphire Testnet to Truffle

And another diff for your applying pleasure:

```diff
diff --git a/truffle-config.js b/truffle-config.js
index 7af2f42..0cd9d36 100644
--- a/truffle-config.js
+++ b/truffle-config.js
@@ -58,6 +58,11 @@ module.exports = {
         new HDWalletProvider([process.env.PRIVATE_KEY], "https://testnet.emerald.oasis.dev"),
       network_id: 0xa515,
     },

> +    sapphire: {

Reviewer: Might as well be explicit about this being the testnet instance as well.

Author: This is already in the associated tutorial video. Perhaps it was a bad decision to name it so in the first place, but it'll start to mismatch once I link the video at the top of this file.

+      provider: () =>
+        new HDWalletProvider([process.env.PRIVATE_KEY], "https://testnet.sapphire.oasis.dev"),
+      network_id: 0x5aff,
+    },
   },

   // Set default mocha options here, use special reporters etc.
```

#### Port to Sapphire

Here's where things start to get interesting.
We're going to add confidentiality to this starter project in exactly two lines
of code.

You'll need to grab the Sapphire compatibility library
([@oasisprotocol/sapphire-paratime]), so make that happen by issuing

```sh

> pnpm add @oasisprotocol/sapphire-paratime # npm also works

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
pnpm add -D @oasisprotocol/sapphire-paratime
```

```

So far so good.
Next, import it by adding this line to the top of `truffle-config.js`:

```typescript
const sapphire = require('@oasisprotocol/sapphire-paratime');
```

That's the first line of code.
Here's the second:

```diff
diff --git a/truffle-config.js b/truffle-config.js
index 0cd9d36..7db7cf8 100644
--- a/truffle-config.js
+++ b/truffle-config.js
@@ -60,7 +60,7 @@ module.exports = {
     },
     sapphire: {
       provider: () =>
-        new HDWalletProvider([process.env.PRIVATE_KEY], "https://testnet.sapphire.oasis.dev"),
+        sapphire.wrap(new HDWalletProvider([process.env.PRIVATE_KEY], "https://testnet.sapphire.oasis.dev")),
       network_id: 0x5aff,
     },
   },
```

This `wrap` function takes any kind of provider or signer you've got and turn
it into one that works with Sapphire and confidentiality.
For the most part, wrapping your signer/provider is the most you'll need to do

> to get your dapp rollin' on Sapphire, but that's not a complete story since an

Reviewer: They see me rollin', they hatin....

Reword.

> unmodified contract may leak state through normal operation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
unmodified contract **may leak state through normal operation**.
```

And now for the moment we've all been waiting for:

```

> > PRIVATE_KEY="0x..." truffle migrate --network sapphire

Reviewer 2: This is the output of `truffle exec`? Migrate seems to be missing for Sapphire?

Sent some coins in 0x6dc6774addf4c5c68a9b2c6b5e5634263e734d321f84012ab1b4cbe237fbe7c2.
A Transfer(0x56e5F834F88F9f7631E9d6a43254e173478cE06a, 0x56e5F834F88F9f7631E9d6a43254e173478cE06a, 42) was emitted.
The balance storage slot contains 0x0.
The contract now has balance: 42.
```

So basically nothing changed, which is pretty much what we're going for.
But take a look at that second to last line where it says what's in the storage
slot. Before, it said `0x2a`, but now it says `0x0`.

> Clearly the slot does contain data or else the contract balance couldn't have

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clearly the slot does contain data or else the contract balance in the next line couldn't have
```

Author: Do you think that this actually makes it easier to understand, or do you just like that it's more consistent with the platonic ideal of docs?

been returned.  
What's happened here is that the Web3 gateway does not have the key used to
decrypt the storage slot, so a default value is returned.

Indeed, the gateway does not even have the key needed to decrypt the _key_ in
the MKVS; it can tell _that_ a storage slot was written, but not which one
(although it can make a very good guess by reading the contract code).

> So you can see that confidentiality is in effect, but it's not something

Reviewer 2: This sentence is not really related to the previous one about the key of the storage slot.

```suggestion

Finally, you can see that confidentiality is in effect out of the box, but it's not something
```

end-users need to think too much about.

[@oasisprotocol/sapphire-paratime]: https://www.npmjs.com/package/@oasisprotocol/sapphire-paratime

## Create a Sapphire-Native dapp

Porting an existing Eth app is cool, and can already provide benefits like
protecting against MEV.
However, starting from scratch with confidentiality in mind can unlock some
really novel dapps and provide a [higher level of security].

One simple-but-useful dapp that takes advantage of confidentiality is a
[dead person's switch] that reveals a secret (let's say the encryption key to a
data trove) if the operator fails to re-up before too long.

> Let's make it happen!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's make it happen - this time using Hardhat!
```

[higher level of security]: guide.md#writing-secure-dapps
[dead person's switch]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dead_man's_switch

### Init a new Hardhat project

1. Make & enter a new directory
2. `npx hardhat` then create a TypeScript project.

> 3. Install `@nomicfoundation/hardhat-toolbox` and its peer dependencies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Confirm installing `@nomicfoundation/hardhat-toolbox` and its dependencies.
```

Author: If you use `pnpm`, you won't do that.

### Add the Sapphire Testnet to Hardhat

Open up your `hardhat.config.ts` and drop in these lines.
They should remind you a lot about what happened with Truffle.

```diff
diff --git a/hardhat.config.ts b/hardhat.config.ts
index 414e974..49c95f9 100644
--- a/hardhat.config.ts
+++ b/hardhat.config.ts
@@ -3,6 +3,15 @@ import "@nomicfoundation/hardhat-toolbox";

 const config: HardhatUserConfig = {
   solidity: "0.8.9",
+  networks: {

> +    sapphire: {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+    sapphire_testnet: {
```

+      chainId: 0x5aff,
+      url: "https://testnet.sapphire.oasis.dev",
+      accounts: [
+        process.env.PRIVATE_KEY ?? Buffer.alloc(0, 32).toString("hex"),
+      ],
+    },
+  },
 };

 export default config;
```

### Get the Contract

This is a Sapphire tutorial and you're already a Solidity expert, so let's not
bore you with explaining the gritty details of the contract.
Start by pasting [Vigil.sol] into `contracts/Vigil.sol`.

While you're there, also place [run-vigil.ts] into `scripts/run-vigil.ts`.
We'll need that later.

[Vigil.sol]: https://github.com/oasisprotocol/sapphire-paratime/blob/main/examples/hardhat/contracts/Vigil.sol
[run-vigil.ts]: https://github.com/oasisprotocol/sapphire-paratime/blob/main/examples/hardhat/scripts/run-vigil.ts

#### Vigil.sol, the interesting parts

> The key state variables are.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The key state variables are:
```

```solidity
    SecretMetadata[] public _metas;
    bytes[] private _secrets;
```

* `_metas` is marked with `public` visibility, so despite the state itself being

>   encrypted and not readable directly, Solidity will generate a getter that will

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  encrypted and not readable directly, **Solidity will generate a getter that will
```

Author: This isn't really that interesting for an experienced solidity dev. That's the whole point of `public` state vars, after all.

>   do the decryption for you.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  do the decryption for you**.
```

* `_secrets` is `private` and therefore truly secret; only the contract can
  access the data contained in this mapping.

And the methods we'll care most about are

* `createSecret`, which adds an entry to both `_metas` and `_secrets`.
* `revealSecret`, which acts as an access-controlled getter for the data
  contained with `_secrets`. Due to trusted execution and confidentiality, the
  only way that the secret will get revealed is if execution proceeds all the
  way to the end of the function and does not revert.

> The rest of the methods are useful if you actually intended to use this thing,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The rest of the methods are useful if you actually intended to use the contract in production,
```

but they demonstrate that developing for Sapphire is essentially the same as for
Ethereum.

> You can even write tests against the Hardhat network 'n jazz.

Reviewer: Reword "'n jazz".

### Run the Contract

And to wrap things up, we'll put `Vigil` through its paces.
First, let's see what's actually going on.

> At the top of the file, we have our import du jour,

Reviewer: Reword "du jour".

> [`@oasisprotocol/sapphire-paratime`].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[@oasisprotocol/sapphire-paratime] which you can install by `npm i @oasisprotocol/sapphire-paratime --save-dev`.
```

Author: Again, this is for experienced solidity devs. If they can't figure out how to install deps, this is not for them.

Unlike for Truffle, we have to "manually" wrap the signer since the Hardhat
config only takes a private key. We do that at the top of `main`.

After deploying the contract, we can create a secret, check that it's not
readable, wait a bit, and then check that it has become readable.
Pretty cool if you ask me!

Anyway, make it happen by running

```sh

> PRIVATE_KEY="0x..." pnpm hardhat run scripts/run-vigil.ts --network sapphire

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PRIVATE_KEY="0x..." npx hardhat run scripts/run-vigil.ts --network sapphire_testnet
```

```

And if you see something like the following, you'll know you're well on the road
to deploying confidential dapps on Sapphire.

```
Vigil deployed to: 0x74dC4879B152FDD1DDe834E9ba187b3e14f462f1
Storing a secret in 0x13125d868f5fb3cbc501466df26055ea063a90014b5ccc8dfd5164dc1dd67543
Checking the secret
failed to fetch secret: reverted: not expired
Waiting...
Checking the secret again
The secret ingredient is brussels sprouts
```

## All done!

Congratulations, you made it through the Sapphire tutorial.
Thanks for coming!

> If you have any more questions, please check out the [guide] or the Discord

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have any more questions, please check out the [guide] or the [Discord
```

> community.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
community](../../get-involved/README.md).
```

}

module.exports = async function (callback) {
  try {
    await exerciseContract();
  } catch (e) {
    console.error(e);
  }
  callback();
};
```

Save it to `scripts/exercise-contract.js`.
We'll use it in just a bit.

Next, you can run the following and see the contract being deployed.

```sh
PRIVATE_KEY="0x..." truffle migrate --network emerald
```

Everything should be succeeding so far.

Finally, run this line and observe some output.

```
> PRIVATE_KEY="0x..." truffle exec --network emerald scripts/exercise.contract.js`

Sent some coins in 0xf415ab586ef1c6c61b84b3bd803ae322f375d1d3164aa8ac13c9ae83c698a002
A Transfer(0x56e5F834F88F9f7631E9d6a43254e173478cE06a, 0x56e5F834F88F9f7631E9d6a43254e173478cE06a, 42) was emitted.
The balance storage slot contains 0x2a.
The contract now has balance: 42
```

Great!
That'll be the baseline for our confidential deployment.

### Deploy to Sapphire (confidential EVM)

#### Get some Sapphire Testnet tokens

Now for the fun part.
As for Emerald, we need to configure the Sapphire network and get some tokens.
Hit up the one and only [Oasis Testnet faucet] and this time select "Sapphire".

> Submit the form and your way.

Reviewer: Missing "on" or similar.

Reviewer 3: Fixed

Ethereum.
You can even write tests against the Hardhat network and use Hardhat plugins.

### Run the Contract

And to wrap things up, we'll put `Vigil` through its paces.
First, let's see what's actually going on.

At the top of the file, we have our favorite import,
[`@oasisprotocol/sapphire-paratime`].
Unlike for Truffle, we have to "manually" wrap the signer since the Hardhat
config only takes a private key. We do that at the top of `main`.

After deploying the contract, we can create a secret, check that it's not
readable, wait a bit, and then check that it has become readable.
Pretty cool if you ask me!

Anyway, make it happen by running

```sh
PRIVATE_KEY="0x..." pnpm hardhat run scripts/run-vigil.ts --network sapphire
```

And if you see something like the following, you'll know you're well on the road
to deploying confidential dapps on Sapphire.

```
Vigil deployed to: 0x74dC4879B152FDD1DDe834E9ba187b3e14f462f1
Storing a secret in 0x13125d868f5fb3cbc501466df26055ea063a90014b5ccc8dfd5164dc1dd67543
Checking the secret
failed to fetch secret: reverted: not expired
Waiting...
Checking the secret again
The secret ingredient is brussels sprouts
```

## All done!

> Congratulations, you made it through the Sapphire tutorial.
> Thanks for coming!
> 
> If you have any more questions, please check out the [guide] or the
> [Discord community].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Congratulations, you made it through the Sapphire tutorial! If you
have any questions, please check out the [guide] or the
[Discord community].
```
